---
aliases: /article/199-introduction-to-group-workspaces
description: What is a Group Workspace?
slug: introduction-to-group-workspaces
title: What is a Group Workspace?
---

## Introduction

This article describes the way that storage is usually provided to projects on JASMIN: the **Group Workspace (GWS)**.

## What is a GWS?

GWSs are portions of disk allocated for particular projects
to manage themselves, enabling collaborating scientists to share network
accessible storage on JASMIN. Users can pull data from external sites to a
common cache, process and analyse their data, and where allowed, exploit data
available from other GWSs and from the CEDA archive.

It is important to understand that these workspaces are not the same as the
CEDA archive. Data in a GWS can be earmarked for ingestion into the CEDA
archive, but this process should be discussed directly with the CEDA Archive team (via the CEDA Helpdesk), it is not automatic and will not happen without prior arrangement.

Data within GWSs are the responsibility of the designated GWS manager and
**are not backed up by the JASMIN team** (see below).

## Accessing a GWS

### Where are GWSs available?

Each GWS volume is found in a directory mounted under a pattern of paths which refers to the capabilities of the storage, ie.

Path | Type | Capability
--- | --- | ---
/gws/nopw/j04/* | SOF | no parallel write (nopw)
/gws/pw/j07/* | PFS | parallel write capable (pw)
/gws/smf/j04/* | SSD | small-files optimised (smf)
{.table .table-striped}

A project may have several GWS volumes, perhaps of different types, for example:

- `/gws/nopw/j04/jules` SOF volume for the `jules` project

GWSs are available on:

- Transfer servers including `xfer*`, `hpxfer*`, `gridftp*` and the JASMIN Default Collection Globus endpoint.
- The general scientific analysis servers `sci*`
- All nodes in the LOTUS and ORCHID clusters
- Some application-specific servers (by arrangement)

They are NOT available on `login` or `nx-login` servers.

### Requesting access to a GWS

There is a Unix group associated with each GWS to provide convenient access
control. Any JASMIN user can apply for access to a given GWS by following the
links provided in the [list of available
GWSs](https://accounts.jasmin.ac.uk/services/group_workspaces/) on the JASMIN Accounts Portal.
**Important:** The GWS
Manager (not the JASMIN team) will need to authorise the request before you are granted access.

Once you have been granted the relevant access role, then the relevant Unix group will be added
to your account. If you are not sure of the group name for your GWS you can
find this by entering the command `groups` to see the names of the groups you
belong to. The group name normally has the prefix “gws_".

{{<alert type="info">}}
All data in a GWS should belong to this group `gws_<name>`, so that group read/write permissions apply to this group rather than the default group, `users`.
{{</alert>}}

## GWS management

Each GWS has a designated manager. See the article on
[managing a GWS]({{< ref "managing-a-gws" >}}).

### Backup

Please note that data in GWSs are only backed up if the GWS Manager has put
tasks in place to do this. The 
[Elastic Tape service]({{< ref "secondary-copy-using-elastic-tape" >}}) is available to enable to  make a secondary near-line copy of data. Please discuss the details with your GWS Manager.

### Recommended directory structure for a GWS

We recommend that a sensible directory structure is set up within your GWS in
order to conventions are used within your GWS:

```txt
<your_gws>/
    users/
        <userid>/   # each user can create their own directory here
    public/         # required if you want to share data via HTTP
    data/
        internal/   # internal/intermediate data
        incoming/   # third-party data brought to the GWS
        output/     # output data generated by project
```

See the GWS etiquette article for more details about GWSs and the [GWS data
sharing via HTTP]({{< ref "share-gws-data-via-http" >}}) article for
information about the use of the `public` directory.
